---
Keywords:
- 1950s
- Brasília
- Catetinho
- wood
- restorations
- modifications
- maintenance
abstract: |
  Among the monuments of Brazilian modernist architecture, the
  Catetinho, built in 1956 near the construction site of Brasília, is
  one of a kind. The only extant work by Oscar Niemeyer built out of
  wood, it was intended to be a temporary office for the President of
  the Republic during the construction of the new capital city. This
  work discusses the current state of conservation of the Catetinho, how
  its design and construction techniques impact conventional wisdom on
  the preservation of both modernist and wooden buildings, and
  recommended strategies to protect material integrity and the
  intelligibility of its original design. The research points out that,
  while the hastily detailed structural system is itself a risk factor
  to the Catetinho's durability, conservation efforts can be helped by a
  clear vision as to which among the existing materials and techniques
  are essential to the building's identity.
author:
- affiliation: 'University of São Paulo, Brazil'
  name: M. M. Mennucci
- affiliation: 'University of Brasília, Brazil'
  name: P.P. Palazzo
bibliography: \_data/biblio.yaml
csl: 'lib/styles/chicago-fullnote-bibliography-with-ibid.csl'
suppress-bibliography: true
title: 'Catetinho: the first presidential house in Brasília, Brazil'
---

> This paper was presented at the 6th International Congress on
> Construction History in Brussels, 2018. It is published as:
>
> Mennucci, Marina Martins, and Pedro P. Palazzo. "Catetinho: The First
> Presidential House in Brasilia, Brazil." In *Building Knowledge,
> Constructing Histories,* edited by Ine Wouters, Stephanie Van de
> Voorde, Inge Bertels, Bernard Espion, Krista de Jonge, and Denis
> Zastavni, 2:927--934. Leiden: CRC : Balkema, 2018. ISBN
> 978-0-429-44675-7.
> <https://www.routledge.com/Building-Knowledge-Constructing-Histories-Proceedings-of-the-6th-International/Wouters-Voorde-Bertels-Espion-Jonge-Zastavni/p/book/9781138584143>

-   [Introduction](#introduction)
-   [The Catetinho: a palace of
    planks](#the-catetinho-a-palace-of-planks)
    -   [Wood and the ethos of spontaneity in Brazilian modernist
        architecture](#wood-and-the-ethos-of-spontaneity-in-brazilian-modernist-architecture)
    -   [Architecture and context of the
        Catetinho](#architecture-and-context-of-the-catetinho)
-   [Preservation and conservation](#preservation-and-conservation)
    -   [Preserving modern architecture in
        Brazil](#preserving-modern-architecture-in-brazil)
    -   [Previous interventions on the
        building](#previous-interventions-on-the-building)
    -   [Present state of preservation and
        conservation](#present-state-of-preservation-and-conservation)
-   [Conclusions](#conclusions)
-   [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)

Introduction
------------

Among the monuments of Brazilian modernist architecture, the Catetinho,
built in 1956 near the construction site of Brasília, is one of a kind.
The only extant work by Oscar Niemeyer (1907--2012) built out of wood,
it was intended to be a temporary office for the President of the
Republic during the construction of the new capital city, and was
nicknamed after the Catete presidential palace in Rio. Because of its
historical importance as the very first structure in this building
campaign, it was listed as a national historical heritage site in 1959,
and now houses a memorial museum.

This work discusses the current state of conservation of the Catetinho,
how its design and construction techniques impact conventional wisdom on
the preservation of both modernist and wooden buildings, and recommended
strategies to protect material integrity and the intelligibility of its
original design. It is based on the inventory the authors conducted on
the building and grounds in 2017, at the request of the National
Institute for Historic and Artistic Heritage (IPHAN).

The Catetinho (Figure 1), originally named Presidential Residence \#1,
actually served as provisional housing and offices for the executives of
the New Capital Development Company (Novacap) on the construction site
of Brasília. Occasionally, President Juscelino Kubitschek (1956--1960,
affectionately known as JK) himself would visit the building and perhaps
spend a night there (Silva 1970). It is generally regarded as the first
building in the construction campaign of the federal capital, and in
this quality, it is the subject of anecdotes and legends crafted to
magnify its history.

The Catetinho is a particularly sensitive heritage site, due both to its
original construction as a temporary shelter, and to the lack of
systematic records of its management and maintenance throughout its six
decades of existence. Careless restorations in 1995 and 2012, hasty
interpretations of its role as a memorial, alternating with long periods
of material and administrative neglect, have added to the building's
ills.

Moreover, the preservation of modernist architecture is still far from
having a relatively consensual set of principles, of the sort that has
been developed over the past century and a half with respect to ancient
works of art. The usual conflation of "modern" with "contemporary," even
in sound historiography (Bruand 1981), has only compounded the problem,
by encouraging public officials to treat the conservation of the
Catetinho in the same way they would handle routine maintenance of any
recent public building.

![](_share/media/image1.jpeg){width="7.361111111111111in"
height="2.5in"}

Drawing a successful preservation strategy to confront these challenges
requires understanding the Catetinho's history and the context of modern
architecture in Brazil, as well as analysing its original frame, to show
the response of temporary construction methods to the building's
survival well beyond its intended life span. Moreover, its use as a
public museum impacts the patterns of deterioration and the requirements
for conserving the collections and providing accessibility.

The Catetinho: a palace of planks
---------------------------------

### Wood and the ethos of spontaneity in Brazilian modernist architecture

Modern architecture in Brazil is famed for its various free-form
concrete structures of the 1940s and 50s, not the least the marble-clad
palaces designed by Oscar Niemeyer in Brasília. Reinforced concrete
became such an integral part of Brazilian culture in the second half of
the twentieth century that popular architecture not only adopted this
construction system, but also made its own several high-style motifs,
such as the iconic columns of the Alvorada presidential palace (Lara
2009).

A lesser-known strain within Brazilian modernism, however, favoured a
rustic approach, creating straightforward---if unmistakably
avant-garde---structural solutions combining concrete with plain
materials such as stone rubble and exposed timbers, evidenced in the
work of Italian-born architect Lina Bo Bardi (Bierrenbach and Rossetti
2014). This current appeared as early as 1944 in Lucio Costa's Park
Hotel São Clemente, in Nova Friburgo, upstate Rio de Janeiro. This
quaint building of timber and glass expresses Costa's definition of
architectural modernity as "the stuff of the mind" rather than mere
choice of materials (Comas 2010).

This rustic strain, purported as an authentic expression of the *genius
loci*, relates to what we would like to call an "ethos of spontaneity"
in Brazilian culture. Akin to sociologist Gilberto Freyre's archetype of
the "cordial (meaning emotional) Brazilian" (Freyre 1986), it posits
spontaneous action as the epitome and acme of national culture. Rather
than explicitly defining or defending this ethos, Lucio Costa
unwittingly expressed it in the opening lines of the report with which
he won the design competition for Brasília itself: "I am only putting
out a possible solution, which was not sought after but appeared, so to
speak, complete" (Costa 2014, 29).

The construction campaign of the Catetinho expresses a combination of
all these aspects of Brazilian modernism. It was the spearhead of the
greatest intellectual and technical effort of the twentieth century in
Brazil: the construction of Brasília, a major achievement of a
modernistic cultural and political élite.

At the same time, the founding myth of the Catetinho, as told by the
former Novacap public relations official, César Prates, enshrined the
ethos of spontaneity: in this narrative (Prates 1983), the company
executives, including Oscar Niemeyer, met in a bar in downtown Rio de
Janeiro on October 17^th^, 1956, to discuss the erection of a
provisional shelter near the construction site of Brasília. In the act,
Niemeyer drew a "napkin sketch"---quite literally---of the building.
Over the following few days, Prates's brother and the other Novacap
executives secured a private loan to fund the construction---it was
intended as a personal gift to President JK. The engineer, Roberto
Magalhães Penna, a close collaborator of the Novacap group, rushed his
construction firm, about the middle of the way from Rio to Brasília, to
ship the required materials in time for the next presidential visit to
the site, less than a month later. The whole process was described by
Niemeyer as "enthusiastic," with the construction process driven by will
power more than anything else (Figure 2).

![](_share/media/image2.jpeg){width="3.543307086614173in"
height="3.547244094488189in"}

### Architecture and context of the Catetinho

Niemeyer conceived the Catetinho as a slender slab on *pilotis* with a
shallow roof and continuous veranda, after the archetypal modernist
housing blocks of the age. This effect was achieved with no more
resources than some dimension wood, originally intended for scaffolding,
and a few bricks, all picked up from Magalhães Penna's construction
company along the way.

The original posts, beams, floor planks, and siding were made of
*Tabebuia* dimension wood, locally known as *ipê*. This tree genus is
native to central Brazil and was once widely used as building material,
before being declared an endangered group in the 1980s. A slab of
unreinforced concrete was poured at grade to stabilise the posts and
create a level ground floor plate, over which a small brick room
provided minimal bracing for the whole building. Beams were created with
makeshift assemblies of wood planks screwed eccentrically to the posts
(Figure 3). The roof was a simple rafter and purlin grid supporting
corrugated metal plates. The main floor counted only five suites and a
large office, so that a service building with kitchen and janitor's
quarters had to be added a couple of months after inauguration.

![](_share/media/image4.jpeg){width="3.543307086614173in"
height="2.3661417322834644in"}

The Catetinho is a precursor and a summary of the construction of
Brasília itself, both in its architecture and in its building process.
After he completed this "plank palace," Niemeyer designed several
provisional buildings for housing, schools, and even an air passenger
terminal, with similar materials and designs: elongated blocks on
slender posts with corridors on one side and shed roofs.

Over the years, the Catetinho suffered several removals and additions
with no documental record. Beginning in the 1970s, its emerging identity
as a museum superseded that of a listed memorial site. This entailed the
accretion of various objects and pieces of furniture, collected from
abandoned buildings around the city or merely intended to compose
allusive settings. The records of these transactions were not cared for
and eventually went missing, making the task of reconstructing the
Catetinho's history as a museum the stuff of conjecture.

In the same way that modernist architecture became ingrained in
Brazilian culture during the second half of the twentieth century, it
played a significant role in the development of institutional and
ideological frameworks for historic preservation in the country,
impacting the preservation of the Catetinho. Modernist artists and
intellectuals, including Lucio Costa himself, were recruited into the
heritage service as soon as it was created, in 1937. Their aesthetic and
political activism has had consequences up to the present day, having
influenced the selection of properties to be listed, conservation
policies, and even selecting a few of their own works to be listed as
heritage---since no age cut-off has ever been in place.

The listing of the Catetinho as a national heritage site in 1959 speaks
of the close interaction between modernist intellectuals and the federal
government. The listing request came directly from President JK, and it
was given expedite treatment by the heritage department, staffed by
former colleagues and friends of Niemeyer's. This fast track entailed,
however, a lack of documentation and discussion about the site and its
future uses. The department head's speech commemorating the listing is
all that remains in the manner of a statement of significance (IPHAN
1959). No known documents had ever made authoritative statements about
appropriate reuse of the building or its surroundings.

Over time, the Catetinho was turned from a memorial dedicated to the
pioneering work of Novacap and JK into an interpretive museum filled
with objects devoid of historical significance, intended to give an
atmosphere that is reminiscent of a frontier station in the 1950s. This
situation has entailed particular challenges for its physical
conservation as well as the preservation of its historic significance.

Preservation and conservation
-----------------------------

### Preserving modern architecture in Brazil

The history of conservation and restoration is strongly influenced by
religious, philosophical, aesthetic, and political ideas, on the
ideological level, and, on the technical level, by the cumulative
achievements of science. Restoration, therefore, is not so much (or
only) a technical matter, but, above all, a cultural phenomenon.
(Macarrón Miguel 2008).

By creating a unique character for each city, historic preservation can
strengthen local cultural identity and economic power in the global
stage. On the other hand, depending on the way in which its historic
significance is emphasised and captured by interest groups, there is a
risk it will be commoditised, sterilising its meaning (Lima 2012). This
is not only a matter of social value---as important as this aspect of
historic preservation may be---, but can impact decision-making in ways
that can threaten a historic site's physical integrity and the
authenticity of the meanings it conveys (Lira 2009, 113).

![](_share/media/image5.jpeg){width="3.543307086614173in"
height="3.062992125984252in"}

In Brazil, historic sites can be listed at the federal, state, or county
level. Since their rulings and technical specifications are binding,
this often generates uncertainty regarding jurisdiction. The civil
society finds itself at loss to understand the processes and values
attached to historic sites, particularly with respect to modernist
architecture. The preservation of recent sites can then be perceived as
subjective and arbitrary, not to mention a burden on their owners
(Oksman 2011). In the specific case of the Catetinho, a further
complication is that it is presently owned and managed by the Federal
District government. As such, the District's historic preservation
office must contend with two, at times conflicting, tasks: setting
directives for the building's conservation and managing its daily use as
a memorial museum (Perea and Palazzo 2017).

Most building pathologies in Brazil are related to poor design,
incorrect execution, and lack of adequate maintenance. In wood
structures, these factors are compounded by biotic agents and the
weather, particularly the alternation between intense solar radiation
and high humidity typical of tropical climates (Brito 2014, Cruz 2001,
Gonzaga 2006, Jankowsky 1990, Lepage 1986, Motta 2010, Oliveira 2016,
Palma and Cruz 2007, Tampone 2016, Vidal, et al. 2015).

Gonzaga (2006) explains that ultraviolet solar rays, even without
penetration, act on the surface of the wood, destroying the pigmentation
of the outermost layer and opening small crevices where moisture
penetrates, causing retraction and providing room for fungi, bacteria,
and insects to proliferate. Infrared rays penetrate even deeper, causing
surface collapse.

Bacterial attack occurs slowly, and, as a result, the wood becomes more
hygroscopic. This, in turn, increases vulnerability to other xylophages
adapted to wet wood. In addition, wetting and drying cycles can cause
the deformation of the wood pieces, especially in clapboard built the
traditional way, with the boards nailed across their upper edges (Larsen
and Marstein 2005). This is precisely the case at the Catetinho,
highlighting the fact that modern architecture does not, necessarily,
improve upon construction and waterproofing techniques used before the
twentieth century (Figure 4). The deformation is caused by moisture
differentials due to rainwater infiltrating the outward surfaces of the
boards and air circulation drying out the inward surfaces.

### Previous interventions on the building

![](_share/media/image9.jpeg){width="3.543307086614173in"
height="2.661417322834646in"}

The makeshift nature of the materials and haste in construction (less
than three weeks) meant that pathologies soon appeared, and the building
underwent several interventions over its sixty-year history. These
interventions were, more often than not, plagued by either a
heavy-handed approach to building maintenance---without taking heritage
values and good practices into account---or the intent of restoring the
Catetinho to a supposedly pristine, though conjectural, original
appearance.

Two major restoration campaigns, in 1995--97 and 2012, were especially
damaging to the physical integrity of the historic fabric. These and
other aggressive, undocumented interventions in 1957, 1960, 1978, and
2002 count for most of the known changes to the building:

-   Clapboard bracing removed from both ends of the *pilotis*, in 1957,
    and southeast bracing recreated in 1995;
-   Original rolling mat blinds removed from the corridor balcony before
    1978, and from the windows at some point between 1978 and 1995;
-   Replacement of some original 15 × 15 cm posts in *ipê* wood with
    composite posts made up of twin 7 × 15 cm profiles in *Ormosia
    (angelim)* wood, conspicuously screwed together, in 1995;
-   Replacement of some load-bearing beams and all of the porch
    railings, both in *ipê* wood, with *angelim* wood, in 1995;
-   Clapboard, interior wall and ceiling sheathing, and roof plates
    entirely replaced in 1995--97;
-   Interior sheathing replaced again in 2012 (Figure 5);
-   Original plumbing siphons replaced with new, production-line parts
    in 2012, even though there had been no running water in the building
    for decades and the original parts were in a fair state of
    conservation;
-   Complete reconstruction of the ground floor slab in 2012---at which
    moment it may or may not have been in its original state---to create
    an accessible route from the parking lot to the kitchen;
-   Repainting and priming on several occasions, including changes in
    paint colours, with neither recorded justification, nor a precise
    record of the existing or new products and techniques employed
    (Figure 6).

Further modifications to the building and its surroundings stemmed from
the use of the Catetinho as a museum, since 1972. The building and its
furniture remained, presumably, from late 1959 until 1972 in the exact
state they had been left in when the Catetinho ceased to be used as a
provisional housing and workplace. Its opening to the public not only as
a memorial, but as an interpretive museum, however, required new
infrastructure and furnishings:

![](_share/media/image10.jpeg){width="3.543307086614173in"
height="2.6535433070866143in"}

-   A very conspicuous, though architecturally compatible,
    administrator's house and cafeteria were erected, probably in 1972
    or even before, just a few metres from the original building;
-   The lighting fixtures were replaced several times between 1997 and
    2012, resulting in incompatible layouts and insertions directly onto
    the sheathings; moreover, the strong lighting poses a threat to the
    museum collection;
-   Incompatible emergency lighting was deployed in 2012, even though
    they were unnecessary, given that all rooms have direct access to
    exterior areas;
-   In spite of heavy-handed accessibility renovations carried out in
    2012, the main exhibition rooms on the upper floor are still only
    reachable by stairs and a corridor with railings that are not
    building code-compliant.

### Present state of preservation and conservation

![](_share/media/image12.jpeg){width="3.542361111111111in"
height="2.361111111111111in"}

![](_share/media/image13.jpeg){width="3.543307086614173in"
height="2.3622047244094486in"}

In the five years that have elapsed since the last major intervention,
the Catetinho has received minimal physical conservation, and already
shows new problems caused by diverse environmental agents. Its
functioning as a public museum has been hampered by a variety of
factors, among which are to be counted the construction of a highway
overpass nearly blocking the entrance to the grounds, in 2014, and the
lack of much needed funding for research and education.

The ceiling over the ground floor, suffering from water run-off (Figure
7), and the floor paint in the areas most exposed to sunlight and rain,
that is, the stairs and the edge of the veranda (Figure 8), have
sustained the strongest damage. Sheathings in the kitchen annex are
moderately compromised by fungus and termites. Most of the dimension
wood in the building---posts, beams, and boards---need attention to
their excessive moisture content during the rainy season, and several
parts are infested with arachnids, insects, fungi, and bacteria.

Structural damage to the posts reflects the difference in species and
assemblies used, as well as biological factors, and bodes ill for the
durability of the building. The unprotected insertion of the posts into
the concrete slab has caused rot in their lower ends, whereas their
middle and upper parts display cracks due to buckling and bolt corrosion
(Figure 9).

Due to the temporary purpose of the Catetinho, its physical conservation
is often at odds with the preservation of its architectural character.
Indeed, much of the damage that begins to take place shortly after each
intervention can be ascribed to the lack of design detailing such as
waterproofing, flashing, or even a sturdier structural concept. This
contradiction requires particular attention, on the historic
preservationist's part, to inconspicuous interventions such as wood
treatment, joint detailing, and choice of paint. This is to avoid future
need for intrusive solutions such as bracing, or even the repeated
replacement of major parts of the construction.

The furniture, though much of it is not original to the Catetinho, has
historical value on its own nevertheless. Direct sunlight and heat has
been causing constant damage, to the point the upholstery needs
replacing every few years.

![](_share/media/image27.jpeg){width="3.5430555555555556in"
height="2.3618055555555557in"}

Conclusions
-----------

The research points out that, while the hastily detailed structural
system is itself a risk factor to the Catetinho's durability,
conservation efforts can be helped by a clear vision as to which among
the existing materials and techniques are essential to the building's
identity, something that was not explicitly considered in previous
restorations. A strict maintenance plan will then be able to preserve
the appearance and materiality, although some original features and
information, such as the paint coating and some of the furniture, are
irrevocably lost.

The present situation of the Catetinho highlights the conflicting nature
of requirements that often arise when preserving modern heritage. On the
one hand, the building's intrinsic concept as a temporary structure is
key to the historic values it embodies. This aspect requires respecting
and preserving its materiality even at the expense of introducing better
architectural detailing to reduce the rate of material deterioration. On
the other hand, what little is left of its original structure is also
crucial archaeological evidence, the loss of which may be resented in
future research.

On top of these two sides to material conservation, a more general
expectation regarding modernist architecture is its pristine appearance.
The matter of patina in modernist heritage is an ongoing discussion
among specialists, but it is often taken for granted that modernist
historic sites should appear to the public exactly as they sprang out of
the designer's mind. This expectation, coupled with another common
misconception, that modern architecture is identical to standard
contemporary building practice, might explain, in part, the heavy-handed
and poorly documented interventions that were imposed on the Catetinho.

The lack of definition regarding the Catetinho's purpose, as well as the
absence of preservation criteria sanctioned by its management are a
continuing liability: maintenance work will inevitably take place in the
near future, but it might be carried out in the absence of specific
conservation guidelines. This paper has offered theoretical and
technical clues to the issues that must be addressed on both regulatory
and managerial levels. These issues are not specific to the Catetinho,
but reflect the conflict between general principles of historic
preservation and the day-to-day tasks of presenting and interpreting the
heritage value of modern architecture.

Acknowledgements
----------------

The authors are grateful to the Federal District Superintendence of
IPHAN, especially to contract managers Maurício Guimarães Goulart and
Thiago Pereira Perpétuo, for the opportunity and funding to survey and
study the Catetinho with complete scholarly autonomy. The Federal
District Culture Department and its Office for Cultural and Artistic
Heritage (Supac), in the persons of its undersecretary Gustavo Pacheco,
Historic Preservation manager Renato Schattan, Architect Beatriz Couto,
former and present Preservation officers Juliana Giareta and Rodrigo
Figueiredo, Conservation officer Lilian Branco Campos, and Catetinho
director Aurentino Costa, enabled free access, study, and handling of
the Catetinho, its holdings, and archives, without which this research
could not have come about. Professor Júlio Eustáquio Mello of the
University of Brasília provided guidance for recovering the history of
the 1995--97 restoration. The Federal District Public Archives provided
access and reproduction rights to its historic photograph collection and
other documents. The authors conducted this study between December, 2016
and June, 2017, on behalf of the architecture, planning, and historic
preservation firm, Ábaco Arquitetura & Design Ambiental, Ltd., to which
IPHAN formally contracted the inventory of the Catetinho. Thus, the
authors extend thanks to the inventory team members and consultants,
Alessio Gallizio, Déborah de Oliveira, Horia Georgescu, Maíra Guimarães,
Marília Alves, Sarah Almeida, and Tauana Ramthum do Amaral.

References
----------

Bierrenbach, Ana Carolina de Souza, and Eduardo Pierrotti Rossetti.
2014. "Lina Bo Bardi reloaded: vestígios, memórias, latências." *Risco:
Revista de Pesquisa em Arquitetura e Urbanismo*, 12 07: 74--86.

Brito, Leandro Dussarrat. 2014. *Patologia em Estruturas de Madeira:
Metodologia de Inspeção e Técnicas de reabilitação.* Ph.D. dissertation.
São Paulo: University of São Paulo graduate program in Structural
Engineering.

Bruand, Yves. 1981. *Arquitetura contemporânea no Brasil.* São Paulo:
Perspectiva.

Comas, Carlos Eduardo Dias. 2010. "Arquitetura moderna, estilo
campestre. Hotel, Parque São Clemente." *Arquitextos*, 08.

Costa, Lucio. 2014. *Relatório do Plano Piloto de Brasília.* 3. ed.
Brasília: IPHAN.

Cruz, Helena. 2001. "Patologia, avaliação e conservação de estruturas de
madeira." *II Curso livre internacional de Património.* Santarém.

Freyre, Gilberto. 1986. *The masters and the slaves: a study in the
development of Brazilian civilization.* Berkeley, Cal.: University of
California Press.

Gonzaga, Armando Luiz. 2006. *Madeira: uso e conservação.* Brasília:
IPHAN.

IPHAN, Instituto do Patrimônio Histórico e Artístico Nacional. 1959.
*Processo de Tombamento n.º 0594--T--59. Edifício conhecido como RP--1
ou "Catetinho", no município de Brasília, Distrito Federal.* Rio de
Janeiro: IPHAN.

Jankowsky, Ivaldo Pontes. 1990. "Fundamentos de preservação de
madeiras." *Documentos florestais* (11): 1--12.

Lara, Fernando Luiz. 2009. "Modernism Made Vernacular: The Brazilian
Case." *Journal of Architectural Education*, Fall: 41--50.

Larsen, Knut Einar, and Nils Marstein. 2005. *Conservation of Historic
Timber Structures: An ecological approach.* London:
Butterworth-Heinemann.

Lepage, E.S. 1986. *Manual de Preservação de Madeiras.* São Paulo: IPT.

Lima, Jayme Wesley de. 2012. *O patrimônio histórico modernista:
Identificação e valoração de edifício não tombado de Brasília. O caso do
edifício sede do Banco do Brasil.* Master\'s thesis. Brasilia:
University of Brasilia graduate program in Architecture and Urbanism.

Lira, Flaviana Barreto. 2009. *Patrimônio cultural e autenticidade:
Montagem de um sistema de indicadores para o monitoramento.* Ph.D.
dissertation. Recife: Federal University of Pernambuco Graduate program
in Urban Development.

Macarrón Miguel, Ana María. 2008. *Historia de la Conservación y la
Restauración desde la Antigüedad hasta el siglo XX.* Madrid: Tecnos.

Motta, Sylvio Nelson Mariano da. 2010. *Metodologia para caracterização
dos processos construtivos e das patologias de edificações históricas:
estudo de caso em Ouro Preto.* Masther\'s thesis. Florianópolis: Federal
University of Santa Catarina graduate program in Civil Engineering.

Oksman, Silvio. 2011. *Preservação do patrimônio arquitetônico moderno:
a FAU de Vilanova Artigas.* Master\'s thesis. São Paulo: University of
São Paulo School of Architecture and Urbanism.

Oliveira, Elian Meneses. 2016. *Avaliações não destrutivas para o
monitoramento de madeiras submetidas a fungos apodrecedores.* Master\'s
thesis. Brasilia: University of Brasilia graduate program in Forestry.

Palma, Pedro, and Helena Cruz. 2007. "Mechanical behaviour of
traditional timber carpentry joints in service conditions: results of
monotonic tests." *16th IIWC International Conference and Symposium.*
Venice : Vicenza: Icomos.

Perea, Aníbal Araujo, and Pedro Paulo Palazzo. 2017. "Tombamento e
gestão de equipamentos culturais: estudos de caso em Brasília." *I
Simpósio Científico Icomos Brasil.* Belo Horizonte: Icomos--Brasil.

Prates, César. 1983. *Do Catetinho ao Alvorada.* Belo Horizonte:
Imprensa Oficial de Minas Gerais.

Silva, Ernesto. 1970. *História de Brasília.* Brasília: Editôra de
Brasília.

Tampone, Gennaro. 2016. "Ancient timber structures: an attempt to define
the components of the paradigm." *20th IIWC International Conference and
Symposium.* Falun: Icomos. 9--16.

Vidal, Jackson Marcelo, Wescley Viana Evangelista, José de Castro Silva,
and Ivaldo Pontes Jankowsky. 2015. "Preservação de madeiras no Brasil:
histórico, cenário atual e tendências." *Ciência Florestal* 25 (1):
257--271.
